{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1 \deff0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f3\froman\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05050102010706020507}Symbol;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;
\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs20\cgrid \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\cs15 \additive \ul\cf2 \sbasedon10 
Hyperlink;}{\*\cs16 \additive \ul\cf12 \sbasedon10 FollowedHyperlink;}}{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid67698689\listsimple{\listlevel\levelnfc23\leveljc0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace0\levelindent0{\leveltext\'01\u-3913 ?;}{\levelnumbers;}
\f3\fbias0 \fi-360\li360\jclisttab\tx360 }{\listname ;}\listid1481728775}{\list\listtemplateid67698689\listsimple{\listlevel\levelnfc23\leveljc0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace0\levelindent0{\leveltext\'01\u-3913 ?;}{\levelnumbers;}\f3\fbias0 
\fi-360\li360\jclisttab\tx360 }{\listname ;}\listid1501701497}}{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1501701497\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid1481728775\listoverridecount0\ls2}}{\info
{\title Challenges in Teaching an Internet Based Course}{\author Charles Severance}{\operator Charles Severance}{\creatim\yr1998\mo2\dy19\hr23\min32}{\revtim\yr1998\mo2\dy19\hr23\min32}{\printim\yr1998\mo2\dy19\hr23\min32}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages5}
{\nofwords1814}{\nofchars10342}{\*\company Michigan State University}{\nofcharsws12700}{\vern71}}\margl1440\margr1440 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\formshade\viewkind4\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot \fet0\sectd \linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl {\*\pnseclvl1
\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang
{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \qc\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \fs20\cgrid {\b\fs28 Challenges in Teaching an Internet Based Course
\par }{\fs24 C. R. Severance, Michigan State University
\par crs@egr.msu.edu
\par http://www.egr.msu.edu/~crs/
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\fs24 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24 Introduction
\par 
\par }{\fs24 This paper describes the experiences in developing and deploying the course }{\b\fs24 EGR124 - Internet and Technology}{\fs24 
 at Michigan State University.  This course is the first college class to be completely delivered using streaming RealVideo and synchronized multimedia.  Summer 1997, CPS291 (a.k.a. EGR124) was taught to 25 MSU students located around Michigan using vi
deo over dial-up internet connections.  Once student took the course from Frankfurt Germany and one student took the course from Hong Kong.  From its inception, the course has been designed as a research project to explore the potential for the applicatio
n of internet-delivered video.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24 Motivation
\par }{\fs24 
\par In 1995, the Western Governors Association started discussing the possibility of a multi-state "virtual university".  By September 1996, they had formed the Western Governor's University (WGU) [6].  The planning 
for the Michigan Virtual Automotive College (MVAC)  [4] was also initiated in early 1996.  Michigan State University also its own Virtual University [3] and provided five courses to MSU students fall semester 1996.
\par 
\par During fall 1996, it became clear that "
virtual university fever" was sweeping higher education. I had a fascination with the low-bandwidth streaming media delivered over the Internet for some time.  The time seemed ripe to explore how this new media could be best used for distance education.  
My research in high performance computing had reached a plateau, so this new area seemed like an ideal place to begin experimentation. 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24 Experiences
\par }{\fs24 
\par Fall 1997, I made a proposal to the MVAC for a web-delivered course titled Internets, Intranets and Firewal
ls which was subsequently accepted as one of the first 23 courses in the MVAC catalog.  At the time of the proposal, I had not yet developed any materials for the course. To motivate myself to develop the materials, I decided to teach the same course at M
SU through the Virtual University.  This course was titled }{\b\fs24 CPS291 - Introduction to Internet}{\fs24 
 [2].  Because I was unsure as to how difficult it would be to deliver the course over the web I decided to initially offer the course from one of our television classrooms.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24 Spring 1997
\par }{\fs24 
\par Because the course was created the last week of fall semester 1996, it was not clear that any students would even sign up for the class.  An ad was placed in the newspaper and we sent an E-Mail invitation to the Honors College.  The 
net result was 26 highly motivated students, half of whom were honors college students.  This made for an enjoyable class. The class was a single hour of lecture per week.  This allowed multiple weeks to produce the course materials.  The classes were sho
wed live on community cable.  After each class, I would digitize the audio and put it up on the web as an experiment.  Some students actually began to skip class and listen to the audio over the Internet.
\par 
\par One week, I decided to cancel lecture and hold "live-on-televi
sion" office hours during the lecture period.  A number of students came in and talked to me (live on TV) during the hour.  About half way through the hour, the studio telephone rang.  On the phone was a student who was sick at home, catching the office h
ours on TV and had called in with a question.  Perhaps the highlight of the class was the oral final exam, shown live on television throughout the greater Lansing area.  Students each were asked a single 2-3 minute question as their final exam.
\par 
\par Looking back, this semester was a very enjoyable experience.   Teaching live students allowed me to bring in gadgets and tell silly stories.  Given that the students were highly motivated, the class was always very interactive.
\par }{\b\fs24 
\par Summer 1997
\par }{\fs24 
\par For summer 1997, the class was adve
rtised as a way to earn a credit while at home over the summer.  We had 25 students from the broad MSU population for this course.  Very few were actually on campus that summer.  I began the process of digitizing and producing the lectures two months befo
r
e the course was to begin.  The first lecture was taped in my office with a Connectix QuickCam and took nearly 100 hours of retakes and HTML development effort to produce the lecture.  Clearly, this was not going to work very well.  By the second lecture,
 
I developed some simple software to automate the HTML production.  I taped the lecture with a camcorder and then digitized the video at the Instructional Television (ITV) studios.  With the automation, the time to produce the lecture was reduced to about 
10 hours.  The last optimization was to move the taping into the studio and trained the ITV staff to digitize the data.  By the fourth lecture, with ITV doing the hard work, my overhead to produce the lecture was reduced to about an hour.
\par 
\par Students would l
isten to one hour of lecture per week and take a quiz every two weeks using an on-line testing tool called Computer Assisted Personalized Approach (CAPA) [1].  There was a real-time chat environment and bulletin board provided but participation was not re
quired.  The students used neither of these facilities.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24 Fall 1997
\par }{\fs24 
\par For fall 1997, we marketed the course to Michigan High School students through a direct mailing.  Because we were not able to market the course well on-campus, the class ended up with 16 on-campus students and 7 high school students.  
\par 
\par Based on the summer experience, I made several changes in the course.  The first assignment was called the "Gauntlet".  This assignment forced the students to debug their technology set-up during the first tw
o weeks of the course.  Also I sent E-mail every two days to maintain more contact with the students.  The lectures were in pretty good shape and the course went reasonably well.  In some sense, I was catching my breath after summer.  I was also teaching 
another class (CPS474 - High Performance Computing) and writing a book during the semester, so CPS291 did not have my full attention.
\par 
\par During the last two weeks of the semester, I decided to assign a group project to produce a web page.  However because I had not ta
ught them how to interact with each other over the web, the project was a complete failure.  The High School students had a particularly difficult time taking the class.  A number of technical issues caused them to continually fall behind. 
 I went to visit one high school to help identify some of the barriers that they encountered.
\par 
\par One of my summer students was interested in an independent study during the fall, so we set out to develop software to make the lecture production process as sim
ple as possible.  The vision was to delegate the complete lecture production process to the ITV staff.  The model was that a faculty member would come in with a floppy disk with PowerPoint, give a lecture to the camera and by the time they went back to th
e
ir office, the on-line lecture would be up on the net.  The idea was to reduce the extra time required f the faculty member to exactly zero.  The result of this effort was the Sync-O-Matic 3000 [5].  December 1996 I shared the software with Ed Jones of Te
xas A&M at Corpus Christie and he began testing the software to develop his own on-line course.
\par }{\b\fs24 
\par Spring 1998
\par 
\par }{\fs24 For spring semester 1998, we created a permanent two-credit class called }{\b\fs24 EGR124 - Internet and Technology}{\fs24 .  This is the first course at MSU that will be taught exclusively
 over the web.  In moving to the two-credit format, we added a larger group project and several more lectures.  Students would wa
tch two hours of lecture every week with an on-line quiz each week.  The group project will consist of the students actually producing a 1/2-hour on-line lecture on a topic of their choice.  Students are also required to participate in the bulletin boards
 
on a regular basis.  I resisted forcing them to use the BBS but they would not learn to use it otherwise.  I am interested to see how much the students use the various forms of communication available to them as they complete their group projects.  One as
pect of the group project is to report on how they communicated among themselves to accomplish the project.
\par 
\par The course was well advertised and students could easily sign-up for the class.  The course ended up with 41 students, 4 of which were high school students. 
\par 
\par The first assignment (The Gauntlet) was expanded to include eight different quests, each forcing the student to use a different technology in the course.  The students had 2.5 weeks to complete the gauntlet - if they did not complete the assignment
, they were dropped from the class.  To support the first assignment, we produced videotape called "Welcome to the MSU Virtual University" with associated printed materials that walked them through each of the steps necessary to accomplish t
he assignment. Interestingly, the course lost about five students to the gauntlet, but those who passed it found it to be quite an effective learning experience.
\par }{\b\fs24 \page 
\par }{\b\fs24 Sync-O-Matic 3000
\par 
\par }{\fs24 To date, Sync-O-Matic has been distributed to 35 educators around the country.  It is currently available at no charge to educational instituti
ons.  There are currently four courses around the country in development using this technology (URLs may be out of date):
\par 
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f3\cgrid \loch\af3\dbch\af0\hich\f3 \'b7\tab}}\pard \fi-360\li360\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\jclisttab\tx360{\*\pn \pnlvlblt\ilvl0\ls1\pnrnot0\pnf3\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnhang{\pntxtb \'b7}}\ls1\adjustright {\fs24 
Statistics for the Sciences Ed Jones, Texas A&M Corpus Christie - http://stat.tamucc.edu/m2342/intro/
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f3\cgrid \loch\af3\dbch\af0\hich\f3 \'b7\tab}}\pard \fi-360\li360\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\jclisttab\tx360{\*\pn \pnlvlblt\ilvl0\ls1\pnrnot0\pnf3\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnhang{\pntxtb \'b7}}\ls1\adjustright {\fs24 
Microeconomics - University of South Carolina Spartanburg, James Reese -http://www.uscs.edu/~jreese/sy{\*\bkmkstart _Hlt412553760}n{\*\bkmkend _Hlt412553760}cweb/chapte{\*\bkmkstart _Hlt412553767}r{\*\bkmkend _Hlt412553767}3/
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f3\cgrid \loch\af3\dbch\af0\hich\f3 \'b7\tab}}\pard \fi-360\li360\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\jclisttab\tx360{\*\pn \pnlvlblt\ilvl0\ls1\pnrnot0\pnf3\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnhang{\pntxtb \'b7}}\ls1\adjustright {\fs24 
Teaching on the Net - Roger Bullis - University of Wisconsin at Stevens Point http://macnt.uwsp.edu/communication/rbullis/isurvived/teachaf.htm
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f3\cgrid \loch\af3\dbch\af0\hich\f3 \'b7\tab}}\pard \fi-360\li360\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\jclisttab\tx360{\*\pn \pnlvlblt\ilvl0\ls1\pnrnot0\pnf3\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnhang{\pntxtb \'b7}}\ls1\adjustright {\fs24 Internet and Technology -
 Robert Chido - University of Wisconsin Stout\line 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\fs24 I have a number of other collaborators around the country.  I hope to have 3-5 other courses up in the format by fall 1998 at Michigan State University.
\par }{\b\fs24 
\par }{\b\fs24 Lessons Learned
\par }{\fs24 
\par The lessons that I have taken away from this experience are as follows:
\par 
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f3\cgrid \loch\af3\dbch\af0\hich\f3 \'b7\tab}}\pard \fi-360\li360\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\jclisttab\tx360{\*\pn \pnlvlblt\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pnf3\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnhang{\pntxtb \'b7}}\ls2\adjustright {\fs24 Wal
k before you fly - The number of technical problems you encounter is amazing - especially if you are the first course to use a particular software feature. 
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f3\cgrid \loch\af3\dbch\af0\hich\f3 \'b7\tab}}\pard \fi-360\li360\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\jclisttab\tx360{\*\pn \pnlvlblt\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pnf3\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnhang{\pntxtb \'b7}}\ls2\adjustright {\fs24 
Get help - I would not still be doing this if it were not for instructional television and virtual university staff at MSU.  During the early phases I was the expert but by the middle of the project they knew more than I did about streaming video.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f3\cgrid \loch\af3\dbch\af0\hich\f3 \'b7\tab}}\pard \fi-360\li360\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\jclisttab\tx360{\*\pn \pnlvlblt\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pnf3\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnhang{\pntxtb \'b7}}\ls2\adjustright {\fs24 
Use E-Mail - Slick technology like chat rooms and bu
lletin boards are an acquired skill.  E-mail is something that most users are comfortable with - if you have a user who cannot use E-Mail, then use the phone for a while.  It is important to establish a feeling of being connected early in the process.

\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f3\cgrid \loch\af3\dbch\af0\hich\f3 \'b7\tab}}\pard \fi-360\li360\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\jclisttab\tx360{\*\pn \pnlvlblt\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pnf3\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnhang{\pntxtb \'b7}}\ls2\adjustright {\fs24 Don'
t ignore the technology problems - I was most successful when I dedicated the first few weeks of the class to debugging student's environments and teaching them basic skills.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f3\cgrid \loch\af3\dbch\af0\hich\f3 \'b7\tab}}\pard \fi-360\li360\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\jclisttab\tx360{\*\pn \pnlvlblt\ilvl0\ls2\pnrnot0\pnf3\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnhang{\pntxtb \'b7}}\ls2\adjustright {\fs24 
Investment up front in automation pays off later - Sync-O-Matic 3000 allowed me to focus on the content rather than on the technology.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\fs24 
\par And finally, when it seems like it is too difficult - call it }{\i\fs24 research}{\fs24  and start writing papers.
\par 
\par }{\b\fs24 Conclusion
\par }{\fs24 
\par The saga of EGR124 and Sync-O-Matic 3000 is not yet complete.  The target enrollment is 100 students in the class by fall 1997.  By then we will have 
paid teaching assistants and the course will be running rather smoothly.  We plan to market a CD-ROM of the course materials at a lower price to make the course available to people who are n
ot really interested in taking a "course" but instead would prefer reference material.
\par 
\par Much of my efforts in the first year of this project have focused on solving technical and logistical problems.  I feel that I have continuously improved the student experience throughout the process but there is far more work 
that needs to be done.  Once the technical issues are under control, I will focus my research energy on understanding how well this course actually teaches the material and how well the students learn 
the material.  I would like to experiment with adding more interactivity to the course during the lectures.
\par }{\b\fs24 
\par References
\par }{\fs24 [1] Computer Assisted Personalized Approach http://www.pa.msu.edu/educ/CAPA/
\par 
\par [2] CPS291 - Introduction to Internet http://www.egr.msu.edu/~crs/school/cps291int/
\par 
\par [3] Michigan State University Virtual University http://www.vu.msu.edu/
\par 
\par [4] MVAC History http://www.mvac.org/history.html
\par 
\par [5] Sync-O-Matic 3000 - http://www.egr.msu.edu/~crs/projects/syncomat/
\par 
\par [6] Western Governors University - http://www.wiche.edu/Telecom/projects/projwgu.htm
\par }}